
> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).
> * to41
> * There isn't a lot of duplicated code in our project, so there isn't a very simple thing I can refactor. It's not like multiple classes are running the same for loop, etc. However, we have on class that is rather large, and it actually has two main "functions". Because of this, we decided that this is something I should refactor to improve our program's design. Specifically, the CellSocietyView class in the CellSociety.UI folder does two things: it handles the user input and interface, and it reads the XML file to actually set up the grid. 
> * We originally designed our class this way because the two are very related. For instance, reading the XML file sets up the grid and determines the values for some of our fields. Further, one of the things the user can do is open a new file to run the simulation, which will call the readXML method again. However, we believe these are two separate actions that should be done by two separate classes. This will add a number of benefits to our program by making our code more manageable and readable.
> * However, we feel that because there are so many variables both classes utilize and that they really only interact with each other, that it doesn't make a lot of sense for them to be two separate classes entirely. It may just be too messy to pass all the parameters around, so I will refactor into an inner class that implements an interface which I will create. This will still improve readability and gives our code more organization. If we decide later on to make them two separate classes entirely (i.e. two different files), which we may do if we add more methods, then this would be a very easy change. 
> * We decided to this via an interface instead of an abstract class, although in all honestly the distinction is still a bit unclear for me. It seems that having the XMLReaderImpl extending an abstract class would be a bit strange and doesn't seem very intuitive. An interface which just lays out the foundation for what the XMLReaderImpl should do seemed more natural.